(indistinct chatter)
It's done.
Come out now.
Hey! Get out now.
Sometimes, such cyclones blow
over the currents of time...
that the scars remain forever.
It was 1350 according
to the Bengali calendar...
and 1943 according
to the English calendar.
The British were in a terrible condition
on three continents.
Adding to that was the Quit India Movement
of 1942.
Last year on 16 October, a horrible cyclone
in Midnapore killed nearly 30,000 people.
From January, dozens of villagers
started crowding the streets of Kolkata.
Japan captured Rangoon.
To provide for the soldiers,
panic spread across rice markets.
That gave rise to the black market.
The price of rice shot from
Rs. 3 to Rs. 40 per maund.
And the great British overlords...
turned a blind eye
to the dozens of people dying.
But we could not turn a blind eye to it.
Those screams consumed us.
We took to the streets
to help in whatever way we could.
Satyabati gathered the women
of our neighbourhood...
and set up a relief association.
The dearth of rice made Bengal suffer.
WE WANT FOOD, NOT WAR.
HELP US.
And it was at Kolkata
that the British were preparing for war.
Describing the condition of India
at the House of Commons...
the British Prime Minister
Churchill said...
"I hate Indians.
They are a beastly people
with a beastly religion."
Let's go.
But the incident disturbed Byomkesh more
than any of us.
THE MAHABHARATA
First, the sham
of the Cripps Mission...
And then the worthlessness
of the denial policy.
And Churchill will still say
that the famine is caused
by overpopulation.
Forgot what else Churchill had said?
That if the country is so famished,
why is Gandhi not dying?
No! What is being passed off
as a natural disaster...
I'm sure it's a conspiracy
by Churchill.
The British have two options now.
Either the death of thousands of villagers
or chaos in Kolkata.
So, you chose the first...
because chaos in Kolkata
would deter the your war situation.
Please don't say 'your', Byomkesh.
It's quite hurtful.
Let it hurt a little.
You can't avoid your responsibilities
as an administrator, Bidhu.
Hurtful, as if!
Yes, if I work for the rulers,
I must do as they say.
Damn it!
- How are you, Bidhu?
- I'm fine.
How's your relief work?
Not too well.
Times are so bad, no one dares to spare
even a single rupee.
Hmm, right...
- Please wait, I'll get some tea.
- No, no.
You must be tired.
I won't have tea today.
I have to leave now
for the Khidirpore dock.
Some military groups are coming.
Why did they have to make Kolkata
the base to fight Japan?
Rubbish!
I'll take my leave.
How far have you read?
Hmm?
I'm not feeling well, Satya.
People are dying all around
and I'm researching epics.
But our means are so limited.
Is it okay to worry yourself sick
this way?
- Here's a letter for you.
- Give it to Ajit.
Please read it aloud, Ajit.
Who's this from?
"Dear Byomkesh, the intelligent one...
New Year greetings to you and Ajit."
It's Rameshwar Ray.
"May your intellect grow by the day
like the moon.
May Ajit's writing bloom
like a peacock's plume.
It's time for me to go."
I've been summoned by Yamaraja,
God of death.
There will be an arrest warrant
very soon.
Of late, while reading 'Krishnakanta's
Will' by Bankimchandra Chattopadhyay...
various thoughts have been coming
to mind.
I'm growing old.
So, I wrote a small poem
for God.
Sing praises of Paramahansa,
by dividing into two his name...
Beauty belongs to the second part
and God, the first does claim.
How did you like the poem?
I have immense faith
in your intellect.
Farewell."
"Postscript...
Please save this letter
as my last memory.
I'll check if you received Rs. 5000
from heaven.
Farewell again...
Rameshwar Ray."
Rameshwar Ray...
- His factory was robbed...
- Hmm.
It's been five or six years.
Are you still in touch?
We don't meet
but he writes to me twice a year...
During New Year
and the Durga festival.
It was after solving that case
that he grew so fond of your husband.
He's a nice man.
Quick-witted and rich.
I had a belief, you know...
that the Laxmi, Goddess of Wealth
only loves owls.
He changed that.
But Byomkesh,
what was the Rs. 5000 about?
Did he lose his mind with age?
Did Bhishma become senile?
You think Rameshwar is Bhishma?
I don't know...
- Ajit can you please get the door?
- I'll get it.
Oh gosh!
Why did you lie down again?
We have visitors.
Get up!
How can I help you?
Greetings!
- Byomkesh?
- Yes?
- Come in.
- Yes.
Please come in.
Please take a seat.
- I'll be back.
- Hmm.
Go on. Please take a seat.
- Greetings, Byomkesh.
- Greetings. Please sit.
Er...
- I am Dr. Suresh Rakshit.
- Okay.
Thank you.
I'm here on behalf of a patient.
Hmm.
He isn't keeping well at all.
Unless you give him some assurance,
it'll be very difficult to save him.
What's the illness?
Paralysis.
Actually, he had a stroke
three months ago.
Since then, he's bedridden.
The lower part of his body
has no feelings.
He can't move at all.
Hmm.
We could somehow save him then.
But his blood pressure was very high.
- Are you the house physician?
- So...
Yes.
I live on the first floor
of his house on rent.
He's a very wealthy man.
He's a money lender.
You might know his name...
Bishu Pal.
Who? Shishu Pal?
- No, Bishu Pal.
- Oh.
Well, it's not like people don't call him
by that name...
Yeah, it's natural to call a usurer so
when there's a famine.
No, Byomkesh.
He is actually very helpful.
- Oh.
- Yes.
He's not hungry for wealth.
Really?
He's helped everyone
in this time of need.
And, a lot of...
I guess I should give you more details.
- Hmm.
- Yes.
He has a debtor, Abhay Ghoshal.
- What Ghoshal?
- Abhay Ghoshal.
Okay.
So, a year ago...
Abhay Ghoshal came to Bishu Pal
for a loan of Rs. 30,000.
Dad respected you a lot...
You are the first person
I came to for help.
Well, Abhay...
Your father might have been
a gentleman...
But I won't be able to lend money
without any mortgage.
I would never propose such a thing.
Here you go.
This is the deed of my house.
I hope you won't have
any issues now.
Actually, occupational hazard.
Please don't mind.
- When will you return the money?
- Within a month.
Forget about a month...
It's been over a year.
Bishu Pal couldn't retrieve his money.
Meanwhile, Abhay Ghoshal disappeared.
Three months ago...
Abhay resurfaced.
He was looting rice
from various godowns.
One day, he raided
Bishu Pal's godown.
Bishu Pal rushed there.
- Carefully.
- Come on, lift that.
- Hey!
- They're coming, run!
- Run, run, run!
Hey, catch them.
Get him!
- Hey!
Come on, you bastard!
Come on.
- Move, you bastard!
- Stealing rice! The nerve!
I can get you arrested for stealing rice
for the black market from my godown.
Return my money.
Or else I'll be compelled
to seize your house.
You can't to do anything.
That document is fake.
- It's a duplicate.
- You cheat!
Return my money.
Give it back right now.
You won't get a penny back.
And if you ask for money again...
I'll kill you.
That did it!
Bishu Pal had a stroke
right after that.
Then, the paralysis...
restricted him to the bed...
He became an invalid.
Any threat to his life?
No... That isn't there.
He's out of it with great effort.
But he fears Abhay Ghoshal will
definitely murder him.
Even if he waives off the loan.
That's why I've come to you, Byomkesh.
To request you give him
some counsel.
- Well, Suresh...
- Then it would be great...
If someone is bent on killing Shishu Pal,
then even Lord Shiva can't stop it.
Oh, Byomkesh!
This gentleman is relying upon you...
No, I'll go.
I'll go, I'll go.
It's good to know a money lender
right now, isn't it?
- Thank you, Byomkesh.
- Hmm.
- Thank you, Ajit.
- Then I'll take your leave.
- Yes.
Here's our address.
You can keep this.
And if you could tell me
when you'll be able to come...
I'll be there today.
Oh, wow!
That's great.
If you could tell me what time...
Four o'clock this afternoon?
- Four o'clock?
- Hmm.
Oh, no. I'll be there at six.
At six.
Six o'clock?
That'll be perfect.
Okay, then we'll meet later today.
- Goodbye, Byomkesh.
- Goodbye.
- Goodbye. This way.
New case?
Yeah, something to do
with paralysis...
Good... You can focus on work now.
No, I don't any much interest
in this case.
I'm curious about is Rameshwar.
Haven't met the man
in a long time, you know.
- I'll pay him a visit, what say?
- Sure, go.
Ajit, we're going out.
- What are you thinking about?
- No. Nothing important.
- Hey, move aside.
- Hmm.
How can I help you?
Greetings, I'm Byomkesh Bakshi
and this is my friend, Ajit Bandhyopadhyay.
We'd like to meet Rameshwar.
- There's nothing to worry about right now.
- Hmm.
- Call me if you need anything.
- Okay.
- And the medicine for night?
- I'll send you the prescription.
- Okay... I'll call you.
- Yes.
Perhaps you can't recognise me.
I am Byomkesh Bakshi.
I'd like to meet your father.
Byomkesh...
Of course, I can recognise you...
- Yesterday, Father had a heart attack...
- Okay...
- He's fine now.
- Okay.
- Could we meet him once?
- You want to meet him?
Okay, come upstairs.
Uh...
He's not well...
He's sleeping now.
Some other day...
Got it.
So, what's the name of the doctor?
He's... Asim Sen.
Very famous doctor.
Asim Sen... Oh, his dispensary is
on Vivekananda Road, right?
Yes, that's him.
Goodbye.
Not possible to meet Rameshwar at all?
We don't have
the doctor's permission, actually.
It's been exhausting for him.
Has Rameshwar been ill
for a long time?
No, his health was mostly fine.
He's quite old now,
so he doesn't leave his room much.
He wrote many letters last night.
God knows to whom...
Then suddenly at night...
Icing on the cake!
- We'll leave now. Goodbye.
- Yes, goodbye.
Goodbye.
Let's go, Ajit.
- Goodbye, then.
- Goodbye.
He's like Dasaratha
from 'The Ramayana'.
And the woman is
as shrewd as Kaikeyi!
Where to now?
- To Asim Sen's chamber.
- Hmm.
I'm Rameshwar's family friend.
I've known him for 30 years.
His heart has grown weak
with age.
We had some minor health problems recently.
But suddenly yesterday,
things got worse.
Anyway, he's fine now.
So, there's no immediate death scare.
I can't vouch for that.
A patient like him can live
another two years...
Or he might have a second attack
today.
So, Dr. Sen...
Do you feel Rameshwar is
being cared for properly in that house?
I felt that Kusheshwar and his wife...
are not allowing anyone
to go near Rameshwar.
You don't know
Rameshwar's family well, do you?
Strange family!
Lavanya runs the household.
There are no servants
in the house.
She's just kept a deaf and dumb cook
because she can't cook herself.
Give me the market ledger.
What's wrong?
Damn it!
- Give me the market ledger.
- Huh?
Onions... ginger... tomatoes...
Lavanya does all other work herself.
I see but why?
I believe Nalini is at the core
of it all.
- Nalini? Rameshwar's daughter?
- Hmm.
Okay...
I'm sure you know that Kusheshwar
and Nalini are...
- Rameshwar's children from his first wife.
- First wife, yes. I know that.
But perhaps you don't know...
that Nalini wanted to marry a guy
against her family's wishes.
Really?
Oh...
See what your daughter's been
up to, Father.
How can some random guy be
the son-in-law of the Ray family?
Why aren't you saying anything?
That's right...
So, what does the guy's father do?
He was part of the Swadeshi Movement.
He was shot dead by the police.
What a disaster!
Is the son
part of the Swadeshi Movement too?
Yes, he is.
He's been to prison twice.
Will you still stay silent, Father?
Listen dear, I love you very much.
I don't want you
to have a hard life.
Father, are you against this marriage?
But Nalini married Debnath
against her family's wishes.
Rameshwar's anger died
in a few days.
But Lavanya's anger did not subside.
You've married
against this family's wishes.
There's no place for you
in this house anymore.
You may leave.
Lavanya prevented Nalini
from meeting her father.
That's not my concern.
You've done enough, now leave.
This is your final payment.
I need only one domestic help.
In case, Rameshwar tries to contact
his daughter through the servants...
she fired everyone.
Rameshwar is under surveillance
in his own house.
But there's no negligence
in his care.
So...
Doctor, Rameshwar has made a will.
How did you...
He wrote about it in his letter,
that's how.
But I wanted to ask you
if that's true.
Yes, it's true.
I believe he's made a will
and given Nalini a part of his property.
How did you know that?
Rameshwar had a heart attack
last night.
An hour after that...
when he was slightly better...
- Doctor.
- Hmm?
I've made a will.
When I die...
Please send word to Nalini.
Doctor?
Hope you'll have dinner with us.
So it's clear that they don't want
Rameshwar to make a will.
- Hmm.
- If Rameshwar makes a will then...
they'll have to share the property
with Nalini.
Yes, if he dies without a will...
the son will inherit the entire property
as the natural heir.
The daughter will get nothing.
Dr. Sen, who is Rameshwar's lawyer?
I don't know if he has one...
(radio playing)
Byomkesh, how did you know Rameshwar
has made a will from his letter?
Hmm?
What was in the letter?
It was...
Rameshwar's poem.
- The poem?
- That's a riddle.
"Sing praises of Paramahansa,
by dividing into two his name...
Beauty belongs to the second part
and God, the first does claim."
And Rameshwar was reading
'Krishnakanta's Will'.
It's very simple.
Solve it yourselves.
What?
Madam... some rice gruel please.
Please, madam...
Eat up, dear.
Have it.
"Have you seen a strange creature
on the city streets?
Excatly like humans.
Or maybe not.
As if they're carricatures, satires
or distortions.
Yet, they move and talk.
And accumulate on the streets
like garbage.
They sit sluggishly over
the mounds of leftovers
And beg for rice gruel."
- Written by Premenandra Mitra.
- Hmm.
- Good evening.
Good evening, Byomkesh.
Please come in.
- Hmm, let's go.
- Byomkesh? Please come in.
Come this way.
- Hey, watch your step!
- Be careful.
Carefully...
Please come.
- Sit.
- Yes, sir.
Sit... they're with me.
Sit down.
Come in.
This is Bishu's office.
Huge business.
Actually, he is in business
with many wealthy men.
- Please come.
- How old is his business?
Uh, I guess around 25 years...
I'm not quite sure...
Please come.
Coming!
Who is it?
I'm Dr. Rakshit.
Please open the door.
Please come in.
Byomkesh is here.
Come on in, Byomkesh.
Come in, Ajit.
In here.
Please switch on the light, dear.
Welcome, Byomkesh.
Thank my lucky stars
that you're here, Byomkesh.
Please take a seat.
Go ahead.
I should have visted you myself.
But you can see my condition.
Byomkesh...
Doc must have told you everything.
Hmm.
Abhay Ghoshal is wasting away
his father's property.
And I came to know...
that Abhay Ghoshal...
has murdered a notorious merchant
called Sambhunath Kundu.
He was acquitted
due to lack of evidence.
His name had come up
for the murder of another man but...
There was no proof.
Why did you let Abhay Ghoshal go
when you caught him?
Out of fear, Byomkesh.
Have you seen Abhay's eyes?
And the man who has been acquitted
after committing murder...
feels encouraged.
Then, I...
had a stroke
and my legs became numb.
Although, Suresh brought
a famous doctor...
But even he couldn't do much.
Doctors are hopeful I won't die
but will I stay alive?
Abhay Ghoshal won't spare me, Byomkesh.
- Here you go.
- Tea.
Who runs the kitchen in your house?
There was a cook.
We got rid of him.
Who looks after the business?
They work in the office.
If it's very important,
they come up and ask me.
But I don't let them enter.
So, the only outsider...
Who can enter your room
is Dr. Rakshit.
Yes.
Well, Bishu...
You've done everything
you had to do.
I can't think of anything else
I can do.
Actually...
Since you're scared
you're worrying too much.
No.
It's not just that.
- Yesterday this...
- I'll get it.
Byomkesh...
Please read it.
Rameshwar Ray?
I've known Rameshwar a long time.
He's like an elder brother to me.
We haven't met
in a long time but...
He writes to me twice a year.
For New Year and the Durga festival?
Yes, but how did you...
I know him too.
Writes to me on those same two occasions.
Oh.
- I'm reading the letter.
- Yes, please read.
Dear brother, Shishu Pal?
Rameshwar has always called me
Shishu Pal.
Wish you a happy New Year.
Of late, quite often...
I see very big men
hovering around me.
In their hands, is my ticket
to go across to the other world.
I get news of your activities
from my son.
My son has become
an ardent follower of yours.
My daughter-in-law
is quite fond of you too.
"I've arranged for my son's fee to you
through the truth-seeker, Byomkesh Bakshi.
I'll find out if you've received it
from my heavenly abode.
May God make you fearless
in your journey.
Yours, Rameshwar Ray."
Rameshwar loves talking in riddles.
Could you make any sense
of this letter?
No.
I received a letter with riddles too...
Why is Rameshwar's son
your ardent follower?
Kusheshwar has always loved me.
And Kusheshwar is looking
into Rameshwar's business now.
A few days ago, he had come
to me for some business advice.
He had taken my advice.
And it had resulted in success.
Okay.
The letter mentions you, Byomkesh.
Moreover, the last line made me
feel quite uneasy.
"May God make you fearless
in your journey."
This line?
Yes.
God has really sent me an 'Abhay'
meaning fearless.
Bishu...
Do you feel Rameshwar Ray
is behind Abhay Ghoshal?
Do you have any old, secret enmity
with Rameshwar?
No.
I feel you're very scared...
So despite having nothing to be afraid of,
you're fearing the worst.
Yes, that's possible.
You can see the condition I'm in.
I want you to go
to Rameshwar's house...
and find out what he exactly meant.
Alright, then.
I'll take my leave.
Wait a minute, Byomkesh.
What's this?
I mean, there's no need.
Just an honorarium.
You wasted your precious time.
- Let's go, Ajit.
- Goodbye.
- Wait, Ajit.
- What happened?
Are you always on guard here?
No, no.
He's not always here.
I mean, there are two guards.
He's here from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
And the other guard is here
from 11 p.m. to 7 a.m.
There are two guards.
Who is on guard
when they're not around?
I'm on guard.
- I want to see your chamber.
- Huh?
- Your chamber.
- Chamber.
- Yes, yes, please come.
- Goodbye.
Watch your step.
Be careful.
Come in, Ajit.
Please come, Byomkesh.
Is this your room?
- No, this is the chamber.
- Oh.
- The living arrangements are at the back.
- Hmm.
Wow!
You've decorated the chamber quite well.
Well, a shabby look
won't earn me money!
So, I have to deck it up
for my patients.
How long have you been
in the practice?
It's been around six months
since I came to Kolkata.
Before that I was at Tamluk.
Oh, you must have shifted here
after the cyclone, right?
- Yes, the condition there...
- Is terrible.
You know...
I heard that...
Before doling out the relief supplies,
the Midnapore judge
made the villagers sign a declaration...
that no one would protest
against the government.
Is it true?
I'm not quite sure.
I didn't stay updated with the news.
Oh, so you don't look back.
Good.
I beg your pardon?
You have quite a collection here.
I'm getting by.
Hmph!
Dr. Rakshit, what do you think...
Is Bishu Pal's fear of death a sign
of mental illness?
Well Byomkesh, when one is so rich...
it's not strange that he'll be afraid.
But I don't think Bishu Pal's fear
is entirely psychological.
Abhay Ghoshal had poisoned
his own father.
Or so I've heard.
Although there's no proof.
And the smuggling of rice
from various godowns at night...
I've heard Abhay Ghoshal is linked
with the black market too.
This is also hearsay?
There's no proof?
- Uh...
- What a strange man!
He's committing one crime after another
but there's no proof...
No one gets to know or understand...
No one can catch him...
- I'm tempted to meet such a man, Ajit!
- Hmm.
Suresh, do you know his address?
- Fraud! You only care about your business!
- Stop it!
- You're a fraud! I'm no longer with you.
- You're talking rubbish.
Debnath, listen to me.
Debnath, hear me out. Debnath!
- What's the matter?
- You must be Abhay Ghoshal.
- Yes.
- Good evening. I'm Byomkesh Bakshi.
I need to talk to you.
Ajit, sit down.
Who set a detective after me?
Shishu Pal?
I heard about you from him.
I'm sure you know that
Bishu Pal's legs are paralysed.
Really?
God is doing his duty
even in this famine?
He can't leave the house, Abhay.
It's not only his legs
but also his fear of you.
Really?
Shishu Pal is the creditor
and I am his debtor.
- I should be hiding from him...
- He believes you want to kill him.
Do you really want
to kill Bishu Pal, Abhay?
The lizard asks the mosquito
if it wants blood!
What should be my reply, Byomkesh?
At least, you admit you're a mosquito!
Yes.
But I know who
to suck blood out of.
What's your opinion about the black market
during the famine?
The Civil Supply Department
is breaking into locked godowns...
and seizing rice, wheat,
oil, salt, kerosene, all of it.
Is this how you'll stop black marketing?
You won't be able to do it.
Never.
The merchants who were selling rice
at the markets...
They' ve completely lost faith
in the government.
- Black marketing will increase, Byomkesh.
- Really?
What about the poor villagers
coming to Kolkata for some rice?
Does that affect your class
of people?
It doesn't, does it?
It won't affect you.
So, don't show fake concern
to become a hero, Mr. Lizard!
Goodbye.
Please leave.
Do you have a cigarette, Mr. Snake?
What's wrong with you, Byomkesh?
It's because of these people
that there's famine in Bengal today, Ajit.
History will not forgive them.
- What happened now?
- Come on, faster!
- Was there anyone inside the carriage?
- I didn't notice.
Do you think someone's following us?
It's possible.
Who could it be?
That's a long list.
It's done.
Come out now.
Hey!
Come on, get out.
What happened?
Here, have some water.
You had a nightmare.
Lie down.
People are dying, Satyabati.
Just because of some vultures
disguised as humans.
And we can do nothing...
Can't do a thing about it.
- We can't do anything.
- Calm down.
Nothing!